There are some conceptual similarities here in this demo compared to the previous video.
In particular, the idea of using some kind of statistical procedure to select subsets of neurons in
the MLP expansion layer as a way to deal with the large dimensionality of the model internals.
But here in this video, I will take a more statistically sophisticated approach by using a t test on
one data set to select neurons to manipulate in a separate data set.
There's a lot of steps in this demo, a lot of moving parts.
So I'm going to organize this demo into three sections or three parts.
And I will give you the overview of each part.
Then switch to code and then come back to the slides to introduce the next part.
It's slightly different from how I typically organize the Python video demos, but I think you will
agree that it's a good approach.
So the major goal of part one is to get activations of MLP neurons for him versus her tokens in different
sentences, and then run a batch of T tests to identify neurons that have significantly different activations
between those two pronouns.
So to begin, I will import the Bert model.
As you know, there are naming convention differences between the Bert model as opposed to the OpenAI
GPT models.
So this is the layer that we want to hook into.
It's called the dense layer in the intermediate group.
You can see that it has the number of output features of 3072 that corresponds to the expansion layer
of the MLP.
So the hook function looks like this.
Very simple.
All I'm doing is extracting the activation values and storing them in a dictionary, so I can later
access and analyze them.
And the data that I will use to identify neurons that have a statistically significant difference in
activation levels between him and her are the same him and her sentences that you've now seen many times
before in this course.
These are the histograms of all the activations from the target indices.
The blue line is the activations that the hook functions get out from the model.
And I have applied the Jlu activation function to show you what it would look like that you see in the
orange line.
Now that's something that I just calculated manually.
It's not what I pulled out of the model.
Anyway, I then ran a t test on each of the 3000 neurons comparing the 54 sentences with him versus
her.
And here you see a scatter plot of those T values.
Turns out that over two thirds of the neurons showed a significant T value for one or the other category.
That is quite a large number of significant effects.
But here I used the correction for multiple comparisons, which actually rewards lots of small p values.
You could also use Bonferroni correction.
It's more stringent than it probably needs to be here.
You'll get a lot fewer significant neurons, but that won't actually change the pattern of findings
that you get from the experiments that I will show you later on.
Okay, so that is the end of part one.
The idea is now I have a T value for each of the neurons in one layer of the model.
All right.
So now I will switch to code and show you how all this stuff gets implemented.
Quite a few libraries that we will use here for the rest of this code demo.
And here I'm loading in the Bert model.
And yeah here you see the layers.
So we are looking for uh these are the transformer blocks.
Here we have the attention block and here is the MLP block.
All of this stuff here is the MLP block.
So here this is called dense.
This is the input to the MLP layer.
This is intermediate.
This is where the MLP layer expands from a dimensionality of 768 to a much larger dimensionality, fanning
out to four x giving us 3072.
And then here in the output layer we have also dense.
And that goes from 3000 back down to 768.
So this is what we want to hook into.
And we are going to get these activation values before we apply the non-linear nonlinear jlu activation.
All right, so, uh, yeah, here's just some convenience variables.
The number of neurons.
And, uh, this just shows you the size.
So 3072 neurons.
And this is the layer that we will hook into.
Okay.
So now we get to part one.
Here is the hook function.
Again super duper simple.
All I'm doing is hooking this into intermediate dense.
And yeah you can see this is just a standard forward hook.
And then all that happens inside this hook is that we grab the output, detach it from the computational
graph, transform it into numpy.
That's just to make things a little bit smoother later on when I'm calling uh numpy and scipy stats
functions.
And then I store it in this dictionary here.
Okay, so run that.
Actually we don't even really need to have this be dynamically named here because I'm only implanting
this into one layer.
But anyway, this will be useful for the code challenge in the next video.
Okay, so now the forward pass.
You've seen these sentences more than once before in this course.
Let me scroll down to the bottom.
Okay.
So all of that stuff is not anything particularly new or here.
Yeah.
So yeah I won't even talk about that okay.
So forward pass.
Uh, here I'm doing the forward pass and then removing the handle immediately because I'm going to create
a new handle in a later part of this code demo.
And then here I'm just printing out the shape so we can confirm the size of this, uh, matrix that
we have exported from the MLP activation values.
Don't worry about this warning.
Uh, if that becomes a problem, then we'll deal with it in the future.
Okay.
So this data set has 108 sequences, uh, of course, 54 for the hymn sentences and 54 identical sentences,
but with her instead of him.
Uh, there are 11 tokens in total, and.
Yeah, 3000 neurons.
Okay.
And then here I'm creating the histograms.
So here's the histogram of those values.
And I just flatten them all out.
So I take all of these values the gigantic number of numbers.
And then I flatten them out into a vector and create a histogram.
By the way when I do this it means I'm also including in this distribution the masked tokens.
So the tokens that correspond to a zero in the attention mask that's here.
So that is where we don't actually want the model to generate any predictions, because the sentences
just had no text after them.
So in theory it would be a little bit cleaner to go through this sequence by sequence and only extract
the activations from valid tokens.
But anyway, it doesn't matter.
It's a relatively small amount of data.
Okay, So I get those data.
And then here is exactly the same data.
But I am running them through the nonlinear activation function.
And that's just to show you the impact of the nonlinear activation function.
And also so you can see that what we've hooked into actually is the pre activation values.
They are normally distributed which is great because we are going to run a bunch of t tests.
And if you're running a parametric statistical test like a t test then uh, it's pretty handy if the
data are normally distributed.
Okay.
Here I am also showing the exact same histograms, but in log scale that just compresses all of the
large values.
It expands the small values.
And that allows you to better appreciate what the jlu activation really does.
So you can see that all of the negative values down here get completely obliterated.
Of course, there are some negative values that pass through the Jlu function because it leaks a little
bit of negative results through.
And up here, when we get to the positive values these are unchanged.
The data are exactly the same.
For relatively large positive values.
So all of these values have basically been squashed out.
They've been clipped.
And this is interesting to observe because this is one of the mechanisms by which the MLP layer imposes
sparsity.
So you have lots of negative values.
And then when they move through this activation a lot of this distribution just gets obliterated.
It gets squashed down to zero.
And that means that only a relatively small number of activations in the MLP layers actually pass through
to be incorporated into the embeddings vector at the end of the transformer block.
Okay, so that is enough for that.
Okay.
So here what I'm doing is looping through all of the sentences, finding one of the target locations.
So I'm looking for either the token for him or the token index for her in this sentence.
And then I'm extracting the first one and then getting the values from this particular sentence only
for that target.
Now, I have explained this code here in a lot of detail earlier in the course, but I just thought
it would be useful to put a little reminder in here, in case you've forgotten that this particular
code happens to work, because I have already guaranteed that each of these sentences has exactly one
appearance of one of the two tokens.
If you have a different experimental setup, different data set where, for example, the word him could
appear multiple times in the sentence, or maybe both him and her can appear in the sentence.
Then you would have to adapt this code.
Okay.
Anyway, so let me run this code here.
And now here I'm doing a t test.
So one sample t test on the activations, comparing the first 54 sentences to the last 54 sentences.
And I'm subtracting the two and testing against a difference value of zero.
So now we can look for positive t values and negative t values.
And we want them to be significant at an FDR correction.
By the way I do not actually specify the significance threshold here in this call to the function.
But the default alpha value, the default threshold is 0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons.
So that's fine.
FDR correction is appropriate for situations where the tests are related to each other, which is certainly
the case here.
All of these data are coming from the same model.
If you would like to be a little bit more stringent, then that's also fine.
You could do something like t dot p value less than 0.05 divided by the number of neurons.
Something like this.
Sorry.
Like this.
That would correspond to a Bonferroni correction.
This is more stringent.
It assumes independence which is actually not appropriate in this case because yeah, we do not have
independent tests here, but it is more stringent.
You're going to find fewer neurons having significant T values, but the end result is going to be basically
the same qualitatively the same.
Okay.
So here I'm looking for I'm calling this variable him neurons.
And her neurons I'm a little bit loose with the terminology here.
I mean first of all I'm being very loose and generous with this terminology because these little computational
units have nothing whatsoever to do with biological neurons.
But that's a separate issue.
Anyway, so the idea is that if the neuron is statistically significant.
So if the p value is small and the t statistic is greater than zero, then I'm calling that him neurons.
So this is going to be a boolean vector I can show you this him neurons.
This is Boolean vector.
It's all trues and falses.
It is true where it is.
The t test was significant and I was also positive meaning more activation for the Him tokens compared
to the Her tokens.
Okay.
And then vice versa for the Her tokens.
And then yeah that's what you see here.
So the red X's are non-significant T values.
And you see that.
Yeah most of the neurons showed some significant Ghent differentiation in their activation values between
the hymn tokens and the her tokens.
The goal of part two of this demo is to have the model make predictions about him or her words in a
completely different set of sentences.
There's also no manipulations of the model in this part.
We're just setting up the experiment.
For that, we will do in part three.
Here are the sentences.
Or it's really one key sentence that we will use.
But I'm going to have the model process this sentence three times with different words masked out.
So the sentence is Robert helped Lucy with her project and she thanked him for his hard work.
Now in the second sentence, we want to know whether the model will predict that the mask token should
be replaced with the word her.
And in the third sentence, we want to know whether the model will predict that the missing token here
should be the word him.
Now, perhaps you can already see where this is going.
In part three of this demo, I'm going to use the t test results from part one to determine which neurons
I should zero out in a causal experiment.
But that's something for the future.
Here what we're going to do is develop the task and the analyses so we know what to look for when we
do the manipulation.
So what I want to do now is find the token logits for him and her for the mask position in all three
of these sentences.
And here you see the visualization of all of those results.
So there's a lot going on here.
Let me take a moment to explain the organization of this graph.
These four bars here on the left are all data from the first sentence, which I am here calling the
clean sentence because there's no mask.
And then this middle group is for the second sentence where the token her was masked out.
And then the third sentence was where him was masked out.
Okay.
And then within each of these sentences, we are interested in two token positions corresponding to
him and her.
And then we have two vocab indices for her and for him.
So that explains why there are three rows in the x axis labels.
The first row is for the vocab tokens, where we get the logits from.
The second row is for the token positions in the text, and the third row indicates which sentence we're
getting the data from.
Okay.
So now let me focus your attention on interpreting these results here from the clean model with no mask.
So we expect the her vocab to have the highest logit when the word in the sentence was her.
And we expect the highest logit for the him vocab term when the token was actually him.
Now there was no mask in this sentence, so the model literally saw exactly those words her and him.
So, you know, this pattern of results is nice to see, but it's kind of trivial.
It's not really surprising or terribly interesting.
In fact, we can use results like this as a sanity check to make sure that our code is correct.
Because if you did not see such a clear pattern or, you know, for example, if the logit pattern was
reversed, then we would suspect that something was wrong with the code.
Maybe in the analysis, maybe in the visualization somewhere.
Anyway, so then when we look at the masked sentences, we see exactly the same pattern of results.
So in particular the her logit is greater than the him logit for the her token, and when the her was
masked out and vice versa for the him token in the him position when that was masked out.
So here when him was masked out.
Pretty confusing.
Overall, this pattern of findings is nice to see.
It shows that the Bert model has a good grasp of grammar and so on.
But anyway, this is the end of the part two of the code demo.
So again, the idea is that we are going to see how this pattern of results changes when we manipulate
the MLP neurons in the experiment in part three.
But before getting to that, I will now switch to Python and show you how to implement this analysis.
So here are the three sentences.
Again.
They're all identical except for the addition of one mask replacing the word her over here and replacing
the word him over here and here.
I tokenize this now, normally if you are tokenizing multiple sentences like this and it's going to
form a batch, you would want to have something like padding equals true because the different sequences
in the batch might have different lengths.
However, we don't have to worry about that here because it's all the same number of words.
It's the same number of tokens.
So we don't actually need to worry about padding in this special case.
Okay, here I am finding the indices of the mask in each of these sentences.
And basically that's just telling me that index five up here is the mask.
So let's count this 01234.
Uh oh.
Is something wrong with the code here.
Why does this say index five?
But here when we literally just counted it we got zero, one, two, 01234.
What's going on here?
Remember that with the Bert tokenizer, the token sequences always begin with the CLS token.
That's 101.
That's what you see here.
So there's actually another token in here for CLS.
So that is zero.
And then we have 12345.
So I just wanted to make sure that was clear.
Okay.
Then I do the forward pass and I get the logits.
Here is where I'm extracting all of the data.
So I'm looping over the three sentences.
And I'm going to extract the logits into this variable here.
So for each sentence I have zero and one.
So this is for the three sentences.
This corresponds to the mask index for her and the mask index for him that you see here.
And then here I have two values that I'm going to extract.
And that corresponds to the output logits.
So the final output logits from the model for the.
Her vocab item and the Him vocab item.
Okay, so I hope that all makes sense.
And these are the key results.
Now when you just look at these numbers it's kind of hard to make sense of them.
So therefore I'm going to visualize them all in a bar plot.
And that is what you see here again as a reminder because it's kind of a complicated organization of
results.
Three sentences are organized into the three groups here.
And then this first row here indicates the token in the model.
So for the vocab logit that we want to extract for her and him.
And this corresponds to the token the missing token the masked token in these sentences.
And the key result is that when we mask out the word her the model has a higher logit for her compared
to him.
And when we mask out the token for him, so the word him does not actually appear anywhere in the sentence
in this sentence here.
And yet the model still has a higher logit for him compared to her.
So that is nice set of findings.
And then the goal of experiment part three.
The experiment in part three is to see whether we can change this bar and this bar by disrupting the
activations of the MLP neurons.
This is the experiment where we are going to implant a hook into the intermediate layer.
Now this hook is not just for getting data like in part one.
We are actually going to manipulate data and put it back into the model for the rest of the forward
pass.
I'm doing two manipulations in these two lines of code.
Now remember that this output tensor is sequence in the batch by tokens by neurons.
So in this first line I'm setting the second sentence.
So index one and the token index corresponding to the word her that is actually masked out.
And all of the neurons that showed a significant t test from part one.
So all of those neurons just for this token, just for this sentence, I'm setting their value to be
zero and similar for the second line.
So these are the neurons that were significantly more active for him versus her from part one in the
token position in the sequence for the masked word him and the third sentence and those are set to zero.
And here is the line where I implant this.
Now notice here I'm just implanting this into the intermediate block and not into intermediate dense.
So here is the question for you.
Why is it the case that in part one I got data from intermediate dense.
But here I'm implanting the hook just into the intermediate without the dense.
Is that a problem or does it matter.
And what would be the difference?
Of course I will answer this question when I switch to code, but I would like you to think about this
before I get there.
And now we can have a look at the results.
So I extracted exactly the same data in exactly the same way as in part two.
Except this is for the manipulated model.
And then I will just subtract those two sets of numbers and show them in a graph that looks like this.
So the x axis here is exactly the same as in part two.
And the y axis is now the change in the logits here in this experiment with the manipulations.
Versus the clean run from part two.
So the first thing to notice is that all four.
Of these bars for the first sentence are exactly zero.
That's good.
That provides yet another sanity check and manipulation control.
Because I did not change any of the activation values from the first sentence.
So if these numbers were anything other than zero, then something would be weird and we'd have to figure
out where's the problem.
But the important results that we are looking for here is the change in the her logit for the token
corresponding that to the her position that was masked out and the him logit in the him token that was
masked out in the third sentence.
So that's this pink bar over here and this blue bar over here.
And the fact that these are both positive indicates that the logits were higher in the clean version
of the model, with no manipulations compared to when we manipulated those neurons.
And over here on the right, you see a scatter plot of the clean logits versus the ablated final output
logits across all of these results.
And they're quite strongly correlated, which just indicates that this manipulation was pretty subtle.
Now, that's not so surprising.
We only manipulated a subset of MLP neurons from one transformer block.
So we wouldn't really expect a large change at the final output.
Logit.
Okay.
So now I will switch to code and go through the details of this experiment.
Here is the hook function.
As a reminder, I'm manipulating the output of the intermediate layer here and only for the second sentence
for the mask position, for where her was masked out, and only for the neurons that had a significant
t test value from, uh, the part one where we tested the data in the independent data set with the
him and her sentences.
And then the corresponding, uh, masking for sentence three, where I got rid of the Him token and
replaced that with the mask.
Okay, so here's the question.
Why am I using intermediate here?
When up above, let me scroll back up to part one.
Uh, where is that hook function?
That's here.
Here.
I implanted this hook to grab the data from intermediate dense.
And why did I do that?
And does it matter?
So the question, the answer to the second question is it does not matter.
And the answer to the first question is I did that basically, literally.
So I could have this short discussion here.
Okay.
So what's the difference between intermediate and intermediate dense.
So intermediate dense.
Let me go back to this description here.
Intermediate dense.
This is the pre uh nonlinear activation functions.
And if you just hook into this entire layer then you're going to get the output of this layer, which
is uh, the same thing that dense calculates but then passed through the jlu activation.
And why is that important.
Why is that relevant?
As I hinted at here with these distributions we're doing t tests on these data.
And so when you are doing a t test to compare two different conditions, it's nice if you can have a
normal distribution that the data are drawn from.
And for the pre non-linear activations those are drawn from a normal distribution.
so it's more amenable to statistical parametric testing.
Whereas here with the Jlu these are certainly not normally distributed.
So technically you could still do a T test, but it would be more appropriate to do some kind of nonparametric
t test like based on medians or based on permutation testing.
Okay.
So that answers the question of why I use these values.
The non-linear activation values for the t test.
The question is why do I claim that it doesn't matter whether we zero out one or the other?
And the answer is that there's no mixing involved here in the difference between.
Let me scroll back up here.
The difference between the output of this intermediate layer and the output of this dense layer.
There's no mixing of the activations.
The neurons don't interact with each other.
Every neuron individually goes through this activation function.
And so if you zero out a neuron here, it's also going to be zeroed out here.
Likewise if you zero out a neuron here then it doesn't matter what value it had here because here you're
zeroing it out.
Okay.
So I hope that makes sense.
Uh, the answer is it does not matter.
We could put this into intermediate or intermediate dense.
We're multiplying by zero.
So it literally has no impact.
Okay.
But I hope that helps you gain some more insight into the workings of these models.
Okay, so, uh, implants that hook, and then I do another forward pass.
And here I am extracting all of the logits exactly as I did before.
I'm calling this variable logits zero just as a way to differentiate them from the clean version.
And here I call this target logits.
Z also stands for zero okay.
Again So these are the key data.
But we want to visualize them to know how to interpret them.
All of the visualization code here is the same as what I showed before from part two.
Except I'm showing the data for this variable delta logits, which is literally just the subtraction
of the non manipulated model.
So the clean model minus the manipulated model over here.
And again we see these are all zeros.
That's good.
That's a confirmation check.
And here what we are particularly interested in is this pink bar and this blue bar.
This shows that when we manipulated the model for the her neurons, or at least the neurons that showed
a significant t test from the independent sample in the third position in the her mask sentence, then
those logits increased here, which means they were more positive in the clean version, which means
that zeroing out those MLP neurons actually had a negative impact on the logits at the output of the
model.
And same thing for him.
There's other stuff going on in here as well, which I'm not going to make any feeble attempt to interpret
because I don't have like hypotheses about those particular sets of findings.
And yeah, as I also mentioned in the slides, we are manipulating a very, very small part of the model.
So it's not surprising that the final model logits at the very end of the model have been perturbed
only a tiny bit by this really targeted focal manipulation.
I hope you found this code demo to be interesting and also inspiring.
There are so many ways that you can do great research and set up really elegant experiments to uncover
subtle patterns of where in the model different kinds of language information is processed and passed
on to subsequent layers.
You're going to follow up on some of these ideas in the code challenge in the next video.
And one small point about coding here.
Hook functions are nothing special in the sense that anything you can do with Python code, you can
put into a hook function.
They can be long and complicated and implement lots of operations.
So that can be useful, but it can also really slow down the processing of the model.
Now, I didn't actually use any complicated hook functions here in this video, but this point will
be relevant for the next video, where you're basically going to take all of the t test code and put
it inside a hook function, so that the language model itself is actually running statistical analyses
during the forward pass.